[Docs] Program upgradability. (#493)
ProvableHQ/leo-docs-source: documentation/guides/03_program_upgradability.md

---
id: upgradability 
title: Upgrading Programs
sidebar_label: Upgrading Programs
---

# A Developer's Guide to Upgradability in Leo

This guide provides a practical overview of Aleo's program upgradability framework, tailored for developers using the Leo language. You'll learn how to configure your program, implement common upgrade patterns, and follow best practices for writing secure, maintainable applications.
For more details on the underlying protocol, refer to the [Aleo docs](TODO).

## 1. Getting Started: The Upgrade Policy

Your program's upgrade policy is defined by an annotation on a constructor (see below) in the Leo program. 
The Leo compiler reads the annotation to understand your intent and generate the appropriate underlying code.

There are four primary upgrade modes:

| Mode         | Description |
|:-------------| :--- |

> | `@noupgrade` | **Default.** The program is not upgradable. |

Author: Fixed!

| `@admin`     | Upgrades are controlled by a single, hardcoded admin address. |
| `@checksum`  | Upgrades are governed by an on-chain checksum, often managed by a separate program (e.g., a DAO). |
| `@custom`    | You write the entire upgrade logic from scratch in the `constructor`. |

## 2. Core Mechanics

Upgradability revolves around a special `constructor` function and on-chain program metadata.

### The `constructor`

> The `constructor` is a special function that runs on-chain during every deployment and upgrade. Think of it as the gatekeeper for your program.

Reviewer: "Think of it as the gatekeeper for your program" isn't super necessary IMO

> The `constructor` is a special function that runs on-chain during every deployment and upgrade. Think of it as the gatekeeper for your program.
> 
> * **It's Immutable:** The logic inside your `constructor` is set in stone at the first deployment. It can never be changed by a future upgrade. A bug here is permanent, so audit it carefully.
> * **It Controls Everything:** If the `constructor` logic fails (e.g., a failed `assert`), the entire deployment or upgrade transaction is rejected.
> * **It's the Key:** A program is only upgradable if it is first deployed with a `constructor`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `constructor` is a special function that runs on-chain during every deployment and upgrade. Think of it as the gatekeeper for your program.  There are two key properties of the `constructor` related to upgradability:

* **Foundational:** A program is only upgradable if it is first deployed with a `constructor`.  If the `constructor` logic fails (e.g., a failed `assert`), the entire deployment or upgrade transaction is rejected.
* **Immutable:** The logic inside the `constructor` is set in stone at the first deployment. It can never be changed by a future upgrade. Any bugs introduced here are permanent, so audit your constructor carefully.

```

### Program Metadata Operands

Within a `constructor`, you can access on-chain metadata about the program using the `self` keyword.

| Operand | Leo Type   | Description |
| :--- |:-----------| :--- |

> | `self.edition` | `u16`      | The program's version number. Starts at `0` and must increment by exactly `1` for each upgrade. |

Reviewer: Agree with Mohammad, need to clarify the behavior

> | `self.edition` | `u16`      | The program's version number. Starts at `0` and must increment by exactly `1` for each upgrade. |

Author: Fixed!

| `self.program_owner` | `address`  | The address that submitted the deployment transaction. |
| `self.checksum` | `[u8, 32]` | The program's checksum, which is a unique identifier for the program's code. |

> You may also refer to other program's metadata by qualifying the operand with the program name, like `Program::edition(credits.aleo)`, `Program::program_owner(foo.aleo)`.

Author: Clarified!

> Note. Programs deployed before upgradability do not have a `program_owner`. Attempting to access it will result in a runtime error.

Reviewer: Agree, maybe (i.e. prior to Leo vX.X.X) instead of (i.e. using older versions ...)?

---

## 3. Upgrade Patterns in Leo

Here are practical recipes for each upgrade mode, including the `program.json` configuration and the corresponding Leo code.

### Pattern 1: Non-Upgradable (Default)

> **Goal:** Explicitly prevent all future upgrades. This is the safest default.

Reviewer: Agreed

```leo
// The 'admin_example' program.
program admin_example.aleo {
    transition main(public a: u32, b: u32) -> u32 {
        let c: u32 = a + b;
        return c;
    }

    // This constructor is auto-generated for the "admin" mode.
    // It ensures that only the designated admin can upgrade the program.
    @admin(address="aleo1rhgdu77hgyqd3xjj8ucu3jj9r2p3lam3tc3h0nvv2d3k0rp2ca5sqsceh7")
    async constructor() {
        // The Leo compiler automatically generates the constructor logic.
    }
}
```

### Pattern 3: Custom Logic (Time-lock Example)

**Goal:** Implement any upgrade logic you need. Here, we'll enforce a time delay before an upgrade is allowed.

**`main.leo`**

With the `@custom` constructor, you are responsible for writing the entire constructor logic yourself.

```leo
// The 'timelock_example' program.
program timelock_example.aleo {
    transition main(public a: u32, b: u32) -> u32 {
        let c: u32 = a + b;
        return c;
    }

    @custom
    async constructor() {
        // For upgrades (edition > 0), enforce a block height condition.
        if self.edition > 0u16 {
            assert(block.height >= 1300u32);
        }
    }
}
```

> ### Pattern 4: Checksum-Driven (Vote Example)

Reviewer: Agreed
